Alright, let's take a look at good old
try and catch for a minute. The try catch
is similar to try and catch in Java but
in Kotlin, you can use try catch as an
expression just like you can use if it's
an expression. Now related to try catch
as I mentioned when we covered quick
differences between Kotlin and Java,
you don't have to declare the exceptions
that a function throws because Kotlin
doesn't distinguish between checked and
unchecked exceptions, so I just wanted to
remind you about that, but getting back
to try and catch now, let's take a look
at how to use try and catch as an
expression, so we're going to write a
function that returns true if a number
is successfully parsed and false
otherwise, I've already setup the usual
project package file you get the drill
by now, I'm sure. Let me come down here
and I'll say fun get number and we'll
pass the string and we want to return an
int because this function is going to
try to parse whatever string is passed
and then we'll say return try and we'll
say integer dot parse int the string
catch e which will be a number format
exception and we'll just return 0,
so there's a couple of things to notice
here, first of all notice the way that we
write the catch part, so instead of
number format exception e we say e colon
number format exception because of
course we're just declaring a local
variable in here, basically. Also just
like the if expression and the one
expression, the last line in each block
will be the value that the try-catch
returns, so here we're returning the
result of the try catch actually I'm
going to indent this a little more so
we're returning the result of the parse
when the parse is successful, but if it
isn't successful and parse int throw the
number format exception then we're just
returning 0. So now let's
call this function from main, so we'll
say print line get number and we'll pass
it 22 so in this case we expect to see
22 printed because parsing should be
successful. So let's run and we'll see
that 22 is printed,
but now let's give it twenty two point
five, this should fail it should cause
number format exception because this
string cannot be parsed to an int so
let's run and we'll see that now we get
0 because this threw an exception,
we caught the exception and we returned 0
from the try catch statement and that
was returned from the function. Now what
if we want it to use finally here?
How would that work? Well let's add a finally
block that just prints some text,
so we'll say finally print line I'm in the
finally block, so we see there's no
errors even though finally isn't
returning a value, we know that from the
print line print line returns unit,
so let's run and we'll see 0 printed while
we see what's in the finally block
printed first and then we see 0 printed
because what will happen is regardless
if we execute the trier to catch the
finally block will execute and then of
course 0 is always returned from the
function and that gets printed as well.
So let's have the finally block return
something, so let's have it return one.
Now if we hover over the one, we'll see
that's kind of in yellow here, we'll see
that we get a message saying the
expression is unused and indeed, if we
run, we'll see that we just get I'm in
the finally block and we still get zero
return from the function, so the finally
block is not involved in the evaluation
of the value of a try-catch expression
you can execute code in the finally
block, but no value will ever be
from the finally blocked, so keep that in
mind if you want to return a value from
the try-catch, you can only specify a
value to return in the try block or the
catch block, anything you specified to be
returned in the finally block is going
to be ignored and that makes sense, right?
Because the finally block is going to be
executed regardless of whether the
trying catch block is executed so if the
finally block could return a value
there'd be no point in specifying a
return value in the trying catch because
you'd always get the return value from
the finally block. So that's why finally
doesn't get involved when it comes to
evaluating the value of the try catch
expression. Alright, so let's remove the
one from the finally because it doesn't
get used and then let's comment out the
catch, what's going to happen in this
case? Well, let's run and we'll see that
we get the exact same thing we get in
Java, we get the finally block executed
but we also get an exception thrown,
so in this case nothing gets returned
because an exception is thrown and so we
don't see anything printed out from this
result, so this is no different than in
Java, we're not catching the exception so
it's thrown and the print line in the
main function isn't executed. Now, just
like with the if expression in the when
expression, if you use try catch as an
expression you can assign it to a
variable and you can use it wherever you
can use an expression. Now let's take a
look at another use of the Elvis
operator, remember the Elvis operator?
We saw how you can use it to assign a
default value when something is null.
Well, instead of assigning a default
value you could also throw an exception.
So let's change our function so that it
will return null when a number format
exception occurs rather than going ahead
and returning 0, so if I uncomment this
for a minute, we were returning 0 and we
don't want to do that, we actually want
to return null because we want to alert
the main function that something didn't
go right, we don't want to throw the
exception but we don't want it to be
business as usual, so we'll change
zero to null here, null.
Now when we do that, of course we'll
get an error it'll say null cannot be a
value of a non null type, because we're
returning an int, we're not returning an
int question mark, so we're not allowed
to assign null to int, so we'll have to
change the return type now, to nullable
int and then the error goes away.
Alright, so now let's go up to the main
function and let's use the Elvis
operator here, so if you'll remember the
Elvis operator is the question mark
followed by the colon and when the
expression in front of the Elvis
operator is null, whatever is on the
right side of the Elvis operator will be
used. So we saw using the Elvis operator
to assign a default value when something
turns out to be null. So now instead here
we'll say well if we get null from get
number we want to throw a different type
of exception, so we want the main
function to stop executing essentially
and throw an exception, so we will put
the Elvis operator here and we'll say
throw, I'm just going to say illegal
argument exception and we'll say number
isn't an int, I mean this is a dumb
example because what we're calling we
you know we could just catch the
exception up here perhaps, but I wanted
to show you how you can use the Elvis
operator to throw an exception instead
of just assigning a default value,
so before we were putting just a value here
and we were using assigning it to
something and if whatever is on the left
hand side turned out to be null,
the default value got assigned instead, well
here's a different way to use it, you can
check the return types of functions and
then depending on what the return type
is, you can do something different and in
this case we're going to throw in a
legal argument exception. So let's run
now and we'll see that now we're getting
an illegal argument exception thrown
with our message, the print line does not
happen because once the exception is
thrown of course execution stops in the
main- in the main function. Now we can
also do something like the following,
as I said you can use the Elvis
operator in this way to check the return
type of a function and then do something
different, so the print line here is
printing the return type of the function
but if this is null, let's have it print
something else and say I can't print the
result. So now, if we run we'll see I'm in
the finally block and then we'll say oh
I can't print the result, so this is a an
elegant way of handling return codes
from functions that indicate that
something went wrong, so instead of
throwing exceptions you could just do
this and then you you know you can keep
on executing and everything's fine,
so you can see that you can do more with
the Elvis operator than just assign
default values to variables when
something turns out to be null, you can
pretty much test anything and then do
other things on the right-hand side of
the operator. Now remember we briefly
talked about the nothing class and I
said that one use case for it is when
you know a function doesn't return
anything, like it's never going to return
anything? For example the function might
include a deliberate infinite loop and
so you know it's never going to return.
Well, another case in which a function
doesn't return anything could be if it's
always going to throw an exception for
example, you might have functions you
haven't implemented yet and what you've
done is you've added a statement that
just throws let's say an illegal
argument exception whenever somebody
calls that function to remind yourself that
oh I haven't implemented that yet and to
let other developers know that the
function isn't ready for primetime yet
they can't use it.
So let's write a function and we'll call
it fun not implemented yet and let's
have it accept a string something string
and we'll just say throw illegal
argument exception and we'll pass the
message implement me and now let's call
the function, so we'll say not
implemented yet and we'll pass string.
I'll comment this out, let's run
and we'll see that we get an exception
that says implement me, what we should do
here to make it absolutely clear that
this function is never going to return
is we could say this returns nothing
because this function will never ever
return anything, as the way it stands now
is always just going to throw an
exception, so this is one other use case
for the nothing type, this is a case
where you'll have a function that will
never return a value. Okay, that's it for
try-catch, it's not much different from
Java except you can use it as an
expression, even though you don't have to
and we also saw a few ways that you can
use the Elvis operator in conjunction
with try-catch. I'll see you in the next video.